In this video we are going to explore the derivatives of two trig functions sine and cosine.
So let's get started.
So it turns out that the derivative of cosine of X is minus the sign of X..
So that's already pretty neat because you take the derivative of one function one trig function and
you get back another trig function.
So now we can kind of do a loop here.
Let's see what is the derivative of minus the sign of X..
So the derivative of minus sine is minus cosine high.
So that's pretty funny.
We get back to this and you can already see that this is gonna go in a circle.
So we take the derivative of minus cosine and that gives us plus sine and then of course the derivative
of sine gives us cosine.
So we've started with cosine taken its derivative and then a derivative and the derivative and derivative
and we end up back at the original function.
That's pretty neat.
I have always remembered this cycle of trig derivatives using this little image here.
So we have co signs up and down and sine left and right and then the negative signs are here.
Like if you think of drawing a diagonal line here than below into the left of the diagonal are negative
and above the diagonal is positive and then you just have to remember that the derivatives flow this
way.
I'm going to talk about integration in a few videos and then the arrows actually flow the other way.
But anyway I don't know if this little picture helps but that's the way that I have always remembered
these cycles of derivatives what I'd like to do in Python is show you this cyclist city of these cosine
and sine derivatives and then use simplify to generate some plots.
So we are going to need simplify and display in math for later printing.
Amazingly we are not going to be using none PIs is probably the first video in ages that we're not using
number pi.
OK.
So let's start off with a you know I use x all the time I mean X is a great letter of course but it's
good to like change things around a little bit.
So q equals symbolic symbol for Q and now I'm going to write out Sim dot def so the derivative of SIM
dot cosine of Q and here you go just as I claimed in these slides it is minus the sign of Q And then
let's try again for sine and then we get that the derivative of sine is cosine OK so to show the cyclist
see what I'm going to do is basically have a loop it's gonna be a loop that's just continuing to compute
the derivative of what goes into the loop and then print out what that derivative is.
So let me show you how this is going to work so I'm going to define a function.
Let's start off with cosine of Q And then let's see.
For i in range 0 2.
How about 8.
So we'll go through this cycle a total of eight times.
So I'm going to display.
So what I want to do here is print out the original function and then print its derivative a fraction
D by D X of percent G R S and then this is gonna be the function equals percent s and then I will replace
that with the derivative.
So let's see.
So this first replacement is going to be late tech version of the function here and then the next substitution
here is going to be the late tech coded version of the derivative of f.
Okay.
So let's just run this code now.
So far this is not terribly interesting.
Well the first line is pretty interesting.
Everything else is quite redundant.
So what I'm going to do now is update this variable F so I'm going to say F equals Sam dot diff of F.
So now notice that although f starts off as being this expression here each time we run in the loop
at each iteration of the loop f is going to become the derivative which means that at the first iteration
of the loop F is cosine of q.
But then at the second iteration of the loop f is going to become the minus sign of q.
So now when we run this you can see that cosine goes to minus sine minus sign minus cosine minus cosine
the sine and then sine back to cosine.
We've gone full circle and then I don't know why we go full circle twice.
OK so that is for algebra.
You know it's just a bunch of letters and lines and curves and things like that.
I would like to see how this looks in pictures.
So therefore what I'm going to do is put these four different components so co-sign the original function
and then all of its derivatives into the same plot.
And to do this I'm going to use the simple plotting and as I've done in previous videos I'm going to
create a shorthand to access simplified plotting dot plot as Sam plus.
So that's just gonna make things a little bit cleaner for the code.
So I don't have to write out all of this business.
All right.
So let's start again resetting F to sim that costs of Q..
Now I'm going to loop again except now this time it's not going to go in eight steps we're just going
to go through this loop once okay.
So what do I want to do.
I want to say something like P that extend and then insert a plot in here.
So that means I need to initially define P out here to be sin plot.
So then the function is going to be f show equals false because I want to put multiple lines multiple
functions into the same plot.
And of course we're going to need a label so we can differentiate all the different lines and that's
going to be the latex version of f.
Now this is fine.
You can define this first plotting object here outside the loop and then inside the loop you just extend
the use this method extend which means to add more lines to this plot that P refers to.
However I'm going to show you a different way to set this up.
So I'm going to write if I equals zero.
So this happens on the very first iteration of this loop.
So on the first iteration of this loop that's when we actually generate the first feature of this plot
the first line in this plot else then we are going to extend it if I is not equal to zero which means
basically if we are already moving through this loop after the first iteration.
Now sometimes it's easier to setup code this way.
So you get everything inside the for loop.
Sometimes it's easier to setup code the way that I showed before where you start initializing some features
of the plot before you get into the loop.
But it's good to know about this possibility in case it's useful in the future.
All right.
Anyway Simplot F and then show equals false and then again label equals him that latex F..
Now here I'm gonna run into the same problem that I had up above which is that if I don't update f then
I'm actually just re plotting the same exact function over and over and over again.
So therefore what I want to do is redefine F to be the derivative of f Okay.
And then let's say P show.
And of course I added a sum line labels here.
So I need to write P that legend equals true.
Okay so let's run this.
Okay so the error is on this line.
And actually this error comes from putting an end parentheses too early so you can see that the way
that I've set this up now which is wrong accidentally is that the label actually goes into the second
argument.
The second input of the extend function which is not what it's supposed to be the label is supposed
to be associated with Simplot.
All right.
Now let's try this okay so it's kind of a nice looking pattern I guess.
But we can't really see which lines correspond to which and they kind of cycle through a bit too much.
So let's see.
I'm going to change the x axis limit from let's try minus three to three and see how that looks.
Okay.
So that looks a little bit better.
Now we need to adjust the colors to make sure that these are actually differential from each other.
So how should we set the colors.
Well we have four different lines so we need to have four different colors.
Now there's a couple of ways that you could set this up.
We could come up with some variable like this and say you know black red blue green and then here I
can say line color equals colors and then the ISF element in colors.
So that's going to work of course it doesn't work for these other lines because I haven't put it here
but I would like to change this.
I would like this to be a little bit more dynamic to be based on AI itself.
So what I'm going to specify is that the colors should be I divided by and let's try the maximum value
here.
So I divided by three I divided by three and I divided by three.
So let's see what this is going to look like.
So copy and then also have to put that in here making sure I don't make the same mistake twice of putting
this line color after the end of the Simplot function.
So it looks like we're missing a line.
Actually what's happening here is that the sign the line for sine is white.
You can actually see it's broken here in here as it crosses through these functions.
OK so dividing by the maximum number of iterations isn't good because then we end up with a number of
one which is pure white.
So maybe let's try dividing by five.
Maybe that looks better than should be consistent here.
OK.
That looks a little bit better except now they're still a little bit hard to distinguish because they're
all grayscale.
What if we would do something like this.
What if I made the middle one which corresponds to green divided by three.
Huh.
Now this is looking better.
Now we can see all four lines and they all have a nice shade of green in this video.
You learned about the cyclic nature of the derivative of sine and cosine and I hope you got a bit of
a review about simply plotting it maybe you also learned a couple of new things.
Of course there is an exercise associated with this video but in the interest of time I didn't want
this video to go on forever so I decided to put the exercise into the next video.
So stay tuned.
Go.
You know get a sip of water or whatever.
Come back with your thinking cap on and get ready for the exercise.